hi so what are we doing here we're
studying vectors in three-dimensional
space right so last time we talked about
what vectors are and what we can do with
them so what can we do with vectors we
can we can take the sum of two vectors
we get another vector this one let me
see if I can adjust it better no what is
it about microphone but by the way I did
find Batteries after I finished my logic
they were hidden in the cabinet so don't
make me do this you don't want that
let's see like this whether yes okay but
tell me if you lose if you lose me if I
will be if I lose battery all right yes
look and take the sum of two vectors and
it's a vector or we can multiply vector
by a number that's a vector but in
addition there are also more
sophisticated durations we can do on
vectors for example dot product now dot
product is a whole different deal
because the input of a dot product
is two different vectors but output is a
number output is a number and I
explained it last time there are two
ways to define the dot product of two
vectors the first way is geometric we
talk about the magnitudes of the two
vectors and the cosine of the angle
between them which we call theta so it's
just the product of these three numbers
but there is also a second way which is
very convenient in calculations which is
defined in terms of the components of
the vectors and those components will be
called XY LV so I put index 1 for the
first three components and in the stool
for the components of the second vector
so the formula looks like this now we
can play with this formulas and we can
derive useful information about vectors
by using the fact that both formulas
give us the same answer
ok for example we can find the angle
theta the angle between the two vectors
by combining this two formulas from the
first formula we learn that the cosine
of this angle is equal to the dot
product divided by the magnitude and now
we use the second formula so this is the
first formula and now we use the second
one to write this in the second for XY
x 1 x 2 + y 1 y 2 plus z 1 z 2 divided
by the length but the length can also be
found from the components for example
the length so the first one is given by
this expression and likewise for the
length of the second expression so we
can write this also very explicitly
using the components or coordinates if
you will so you see this is an
unexpected formula in the following
sense you have two vectors and which are
given by by this coordinates x1 x2 x1 y1
z1 and x2 y2 z2 when we just look at
these coordinates we don't know where
exactly the vectors are we'd have to
plot them on in space to really
understand their relative position so it
looks like it would be very difficult to
find out what the angle is between them
but in fact there is a very explicit
formula which uses nothing but the
expression for a and B in terms of
components right so this formula only
uses x1 y1 z1 which are the components
of a and x2 y2 and z2 which are the
components of B a priori there's no
reason to believe that there would be
such a formula but we were able to
derive it by combining two different
definitions of dot product it's not it's
not it's not like it's very simple but
it's not too complicated either I mean
both are square roots and so on but it
is it is very explicit so for example
you can program it on your computer and
then every time you so your computer
would be your program on the computer
would be like that black black box the
dot product for example you can program
your computer to calculate the dot
product you get a number but you can
also program your computer
the cosine of the angle by simply
calculate calculating this that's very
simple which can be done very quickly so
that's the power of this method that we
are talking about that using this
methods we can learn a lot about the
geometry of of vectors say or other
geometric objects by using as input
algebraic information such as the
components of these vectors with respect
to the XYZ coordinate system one
application of this is the following
there is a very special angle for which
special angle theta for which the cosine
is equal to zero so cosine theta is
equal to zero if theta is equal to PI
over two where actually there's not just
one but two different values PI over 2
and negative PI over 2 right right so if
you have a angle like this like this the
projection onto the X plane which is the
cosine is equal to zero so in this case
the dot product formula tells us that
the dot product is zero in this case so
we can use it you can use this formula
to determine whether the vectors a and B
are perpendicular to each other
or not
[Applause]
when I say perpendicular I mean that the
angle between them is 90 degrees but to
say that the angle between is between
them is 90 degrees well it means that
they are either like this or like this
right doesn't matter both cases are
perpendicular and in this case a dot B
is equal to zero so if you are given two
vectors it's very easy to find out if
they are perpendicular or not you simply
take the dot product even by this very
simple formula number two and you see
whether if it's zero they are
perpendicular if it's nonzero they are
not so that's a useful application with
all these formulas there is one more
operation that we will need for vectors
and that's called the cross product now
the terminology here is really not very
doesn't really make much you know how
should I say it's not very imaginative
in somewhat in some ways it's just that
in the first case we denoted by dot so
we call it dot product and second key to
use originally by cross it's called
cross product there is no other there's
no underlying reason for calling them
this way it's just a tradition so don't
try to read too much into into this into
this terminology it's just the way it is
because of the kind of notation that
historically people have gotten used to
over the years so the second operation
is the cross product and again I would
like to think of it as a black box which
have certain input and certain output
okay
but now the input will be the same as in
the case of a dot product the input will
consist of two vectors
so the collector number one injector
number two but the output will be
instead of a number in the case of a dot
product a vector itself a vector as well
so the notation for this is a cross B
and again there are two different if and
there are two different definitions just
that in the case of a dot product the
first definition being geometric and the
second definition being algebraic so
what's the first definition the first
definition to explain the first
definition I have to draw a picture so
here I have two vectors a and B and we
should think we should think that they
are not they not don't necessarily on
this plane but in fact there is some
plane which might be sticking out so I
want to draw I would like to imagine
this piece of this plane which is kind
of floating somewhere it's not it's not
inside the blackboard but it's sticking
out in fact I can use this blackboard to
carry Illustrated so that's a kind of
that's a kind of plane I'm talking about
all right
so in fact I might use it I never
thought of that before
very very nice three-dimensional visual
aid here so here is my so it gives me a
lot of flexibility not all not long
contract gives me I can do all possible
planes but you know turning is global
and then rotate so
no really I'm a muse bug okay you know
it's nice to have good surprises
okay so here are the two vectors so now
that I don't have to explain to you okay
it sticking out or something because now
you can see it so here's a and here's B
now and that's the plane which contains
them so the result of the cross product
of these two vectors is going to be
vector which will be perpendicular to
this plane here I need a big stick which
I don't I don't I don't have but I have
a small snip I have this I have my pen
okay so it's going to be the eraser okay
thank you so I'm doing really well in
visual aids
today I'm very proud so with your help
thank you
so the people watching this is how this
is how it's done this is the cross
product of AMD now so it's a vector
which is perpendicular to this plane
which is good because I of the vector
actually not exactly because if I just
say that it is perpendicular there are
two possibilities for it it could go
like this or it could go like this but
that's where I use the corkscrew rule
right and the core school rule tells me
that it should I use the corkscrew rule
in the following way that this vector
this vector and this vector should form
the reentered system coordinate system
in other words if I turn my corkscrew
from A to B it should move in the
direction of the sector's which means
this is the correct position not not
like this okay
so I explained to you what the direction
of this vector is but it's not enough to
define a vector I have to give it a give
tell you what the direction is and I
have to tell you what the magnitude is
so the magnitude of this vector is going
to be the area of this parallelogram so
in words the cross-product is the vector
perpendicular perpendicular and I will
say the word oriented where arrogance it
means that a B and this vector form the
satisfy the score score rule or the
right-hand rule whatever you like and
this is a vector perpendicular I can
erase this now because I have a much
better illustration perpendicular to the
plane I will say plane spanned by a and
B fan by indeed in the plane which
contains both of them it is in fact a
unique plane unless of course this two
vectors are proportional to each other
if the two vectors are proportional to
each other the answer is going to be a
zero vector so let me assume that they
are not proportional to each other like
this so they are not pointing in the
same direction then they do span a plane
there is a unique plane which contains
them let me let me qualify this there is
a unique plane which contains them as
soon as I specify a particular point in
other words as soon as I say to which
point I'm applying these two vectors as
I explained to you last time a vector
representation of a vector is not unique
in fact I could parallel transform it so
I could apply it to a different point
which would simply mean moving this
blackboard I'm not going to do this now
it's perpendicular to the plane spanned
by a and B and
by applying spend by a and B I mean what
I just explained of magnitude magnitude
equal to the area of the parallelogram
which is spanned by which is drawn here
I'm not going to write it and watch so
what is this area we can find it very
easily because because we know we know
that the area of parallelogram can be
computed by dropping a perpendicular
perpendicular line like this so this is
90 degrees so let's call this H and so
this area is a the lengths of a times H
right I have to be careful not to shift
it you know that a times H but H in turn
is the length of B times the sine of
this angle right here which I call again
theta because that's the angle between a
and B right because you got here a
triangle for which this is 90 degrees so
you can find this side by taking this
side which is the length of B and
multiplying by the sine of this angle so
H is this and therefore the length of a
cross B is the length of a
times h which is length of a time's the
length of B times the sine of the second
so to repeat the cross product of two
vectors is a vector perpendicular to the
plane spanned by these two vectors which
satisfies the orientation rule with
respect to those two vectors and whose
length is equal to the length of a
length of B times the sine of the angle
between them this is the analogue of the
first definition of the dot product
which also involves nothing but the
length and the cosine of the angle in
this case there is a little more because
I also specify particular direction
which is determined by the plane now
what about the second definition in the
second definition I am only allowed to
use the components X Y y1 x1 y1 z1 of
the first vector and x2 y2 and z2 of the
second vector so after it's not clear
what the formula should be so I'll just
give you the answer and then it's an
interesting problem which you can read
about in the book to see that indeed the
two definitions are equivalent
last time I explained to you how to show
that one in Tunisia implies the other
did not explain how the first implies
the second which you can also read in
the book so the second definition is the
following
it involves a certain a new piece of
notation which is called a determinant
determinant is given by a sort of
formula the determinant you apply to the
determinant to to this table or 3x3
table of symbols which you can multiply
and add to each other as is the case
here and specifically the formula in
this case what concretely the formula is
the following there is a simple rule how
to calculate it and the rule is that you
have to go along the first row so you
have I then you have J and then you have
K so the formula will have three terms
one corresponding to I 1 K is going to J
and 1 clicks point ok the term clicks
point to I is obtained as follows
you simply cross the colon and the row
where you have I so what remains is this
2x2 square and then this 2x2 square you
take a product along the diagonal minus
the product along this diagonal this
minus this in other words you have is I
multiplied by Y 1 Z 2 minus V 1 Y 2
this is the first term for the second
term we take J and to get the
corresponding term we cross out the row
and the column where J is positioned so
what you end up with again is a 2 by 2
squared ok you cannot put them next to
each other so you get x1 z1 x2 and z2
and you take this diagonal product minus
this diagonal product so the result is J
times X 1 Z 2 minus Z 1 X and finally
you do the same to K so the result is
let's square then you get x1 y2 minus y1
x2 and there is one more thing you have
to remember you have to remember to
alternate the signs so you put plug here
minus here and plus here well this you
don't have to put the COS of the first
so I put equal meaning that I'm
continuing that for lo okay so very
explicit something to you have to play
with it to remit to to memorize not to
not too difficult yes
what about yeah you can use a question
is what about some other rule which I
come here but you can use whatever you
can use whatever rule you like as long
as you get the right answer
fine I'm sure some people can just look
at it and keep tell you the answer I
think it's much easier than doing a
Rubik's Cube you know to be honest some
people can do it with like 27 so not me
all right so I'm sure each of you will
will have their own way to calculate
this I just told you mine which one
let's not mine
of course but the one I use and which I
think most people use okay so that's a
cross-product and so again you have two
different definitions one is geometric
it's about vectors and their positions
and the angle between them and the
lengths and so on geometric
characteristics and the second one is
algebraic in terms of just the
components of the vectors and so what it
means is that you can also apply this to
calculate various things for example you
can calculate this way the area of the
parallelogram which is spanned by these
two vectors because the area of the
parallelogram is just the magnitude of
this vector so we can use it use it to
to compute the area of the parallelogram
by simply taking the magnitude of this
vector which is to say taking the square
of this coordinate plus the square of
this coordinate plus the square of this
coordinate and taking the square root of
the result let's let's do some let's do
some calculation let's say example find
area of the parallelogram let me just
save time right for parallelogram like
this spanned by the vectors a which is
equal to 1 2 3 V which is equal to
negative 2 3 & 1
okay just just random numbers ok very
easy so first of all we calculate the
cross product between these two vectors
by using this formula so we put i j k 1
2 3 negative 2 3 1 it would be
embarrassing if the answer is 0 they
will actually be parallel although that
would be good illustration of of that of
that case so so i is equal to in front
of i we have this 1 so it's 2 minus 9
right and then you have happy put minus
remember there is a - maybe I should
emphasize it
there's a minus here in the middle some
polka - then you have J so you have one
plus six
okay and finally you have sound of key
you have this three plus four so that's
minus 7 negative 7i minus 7 j plus 7 k
okay so that's the cross product and you
want to calculate the area to calculate
the area I have to take the magnitude of
this vector let's check my calculations
because so now the magnitude is just the
square root of the sum of squares which
is 7 squared squared sin squared which
is 3 times 7 squared which is 7 x
squared so that's the final answer any
questions okay
so that's a cross-product and yes that
gives us the area of that parallelogram
I'm sorry does it look like this is
formula well it looks like this is
formula for a reason because what we are
calculating with the length of this
vector and the length of the vector is
given by the same formula as a distance
formula for the distance between the
initial point and the end point right so
in this case the initial point is 0 0 0
and the end point is negative seven
ninety seven seven so that's why we
simply have to do apply the distance
formula we are applying this informal
right so let me just say this since
since the question was that if this is a
vector and just any vector not
necessarily coming from this problem
could be from any problem if I have a
vector the length of this vector is just
the distance between the initial point
and the end point so this is point point
a and it's point B from the distance
between a and B and so it would be equal
to the square root of the squares of the
distance of the difference all right
in the case of a dot product there was a
special case when the cosine was 0 and
cosine is zero when two vectors are
perpendicular in the case of cross
product there is also special case when
when sine is 0
but unlike unlike the cosine sine is
equal to 0 if theta is equal to 0 or PI
which is to say that the two vectors
either point in the same direction so
that the angle between them is 0 right
or they point in opposite directions
right so in this case the cross-product
according to the first formula is the
zero vector right because the first four
more tells us that you get a vector
whose magnitude is zero there is only
one vector whose magnitude is zero and
that the zero vector and for good reason
because in this case if two if the two
vectors a and B are parallel to each
other
there is no plane which they span so we
cannot speak of a plane we cannot speak
of a vector perpendicular to this plane
therefore the only answer that we could
possibly get is the answer zero which
incidentally is a very good opportunity
to talk about the vector zero because
this is something which people might
find confusing partly the confusion is
due to a very unfortunate choice of
notation but we have I'd like to say it
once and for all kind of to explain this
once and for all there are three
different objects which are denoted in
almost the same way we have to know the
difference between them
one is 0 1 is 0 like this and there is
also all so how do you distinguish
between this how kind of just to
emphasize these are numbers 0 and this
is okay so what are these objects this
is the simplest one this is just number
0 this is something which you don't need
to take to understand that you don't
need to take multivariable calculus you
don't need to take outcomes at all right
it's something which will know what 0
means hopefully now this is something
which we are which is very much to the
point here amongst all the vectors we
have vector 0 and the easiest way to
explain what vector 0 is is to think
about vectors the way I explained last
time to think about vectors as a shift
think of a vector as a shift in a
three-dimensional space as an operation
of a parallel transport of all points in
in space applied to each point it gives
you another point which we illustrate in
general we illustrate by a vector by my
arrow like this so this vector is equal
to this vector to look to this vector
and so on because we shift the entire
blackboard this way so each point gets
shifted in the same direction with the
same magnitude were but it once we start
talking about shifts we have to include
a very particular shift namely shift by
noting the identical identical
transformation we do nothing if we talk
about if we allow to take any shift
whatsoever which certainly should be
allowed to take a trivial shift shift by
a gyro that's the vector which is
represented in this way
now we can't really draw it because see
we usually draw it one because to draw
it we use the initial point and the
final point and then we connect them by
segment and then we place an arrow to
indicate from where to where we are
going
if there is no shift we start an end at
the same point and then there is no
place to play to put an arrow so it
starts looking like a point which it is
not okay because as we discussed that
the point is just static object in space
which is that know about anything else
just about itself right and the vector
is a totally different concept the
vector is not a point vector rather is
an iteration which you apply to all
points at the same time and that's why
we can represent each vector by an arrow
starting at each point so this is a
special special vector which corresponds
to the transformation by nothing okay
let's hold it now you can ask why do we
need it why do we need such a
transformation if it's nothing we don't
it's not going to help us it is
important because we have to include it
for consistence here because we know
that vectors we want to have various
operations on vectors for example
addition of vectors multiplication by
scalar so for instance we can take two
vectors which are which are which are
pointing in the opposite directions and
which are have the same length
such vectors we can call a and negative
a negative a it simply means that it has
the same magnitude but points in the
opposite direction now we would like to
have a consistent system of vectors in
the sense that if we take the sum of two
vectors we are going to get another
vector
so in particular we should be able to
take the sum of these two vectors what's
the answer
we have to have a vector which is the
sum of them but the sum of them is
precisely this information which I'm
talking about you first shift the
blackboard this way but then sum becomes
it says no no no put it back so you
shift it bad
the net result is if you did nothing but
sort of nothing came out as the result
of something so to be able to to have a
sum of these two vectors we have to have
you know this vector on our books that's
why this vector is important it's one of
the reasons we would not have a
consistent system of vectors if we did
not include this but note that this is
not the number zero because the sum of
two vectors is not a number in fact if
we want to represent it in code in
coordinates we would have to write it
like this and again I emphasize that
these are not letters but numbers zero
so that's the difference this is just
one zero and these are three zeros right
so it's different but of course with
three zeros the meaning of these three
zeros is very special because for a
general vector like vector a this 1 2 3
would correspond to the components of
this vector here this is the vector
which has component 0 in each place ok
so I hope that the difference between
this two is clear
and finally we also have fears as if
this was not enough we have one more
object which almost looks the same or
notation for which looks almost the same
and that is actually the point which is
the origin when we draw our coordinate
system we oftentimes like this axis XY
z--
we oftentimes need some notation for
this special point because this is very
special point in the in the
three-dimensional space once we
introduce the coordinate system which is
at the center of the coordinate system
we call it the origin of the coordinate
system so we oftentimes need a letter
for it and because it's called origin
it's natural to call it by the letter O
which is very unfortunate because it
looks like zero right but it's not zero
the point is however that you can
represent this is the letter O but you
can write just like every point P you
can write it in coordinates and the
coordinates would be zero zero zero AC
so now it looks very much like this but
not the same because if we use the round
brackets we are talking about points and
if we use the angle brackets we are
talking about vectors so this
corresponds to the actual point right
actual point which just sits here and it
doesn't know anything about other points
whereas this represent a vector which
you can think of as a transformation of
the entire space which you can apply to
any point it's just that the result will
be that same point you can apply to this
point but you can also apply it to this
point and that's what we DIF between
these two we indicate by different
notation so this is something to chew on
I guess if you if you still confuse the
values just think about it I think it's
fairly self-explanatory but I think you
will not be able to make much progress
in this in this you know area which we
are discussing now if you don't clearly
understand the distinction between these
three objects so this is a very good
test how well you understand vector
analysis and coordinate system in
three-dimensional space and I really
wanted to emphasize this because this is
one of the most common points of
confusion all right are there any
questions about this
okay so what do we do next next actually
we are we are ready to do to do some fun
stuff in space we have basically laid
the groundwork for it we have developed
the formalism we needed by me by which I
mean finding vectors defining vectors
and studying some of their properties
and now we can actually use this
formulation to to start representing
letters geometric objects in space so
what kind of objects am I talking about
sorry second conics conic we've also
represent by the there are simpler out
simpler ones so we will start with the
simplest ones and we will progress to
the harder ones right which seems like a
good a good strategy conics will be sort
of the next level of difficulty that's
right lines and planes this is something
I already told you about earlier the
simplest the simplest objects are linear
objects which means in dimension 1 lines
and in dimension 2 planes it's sort of a
I guess it's sort of a philosophical
question as to why this really our
simplest objects but mathematically it's
quite clear because the equations and
formulas which you use to represent them
at the simplest possible ones as you
will see so when we try to to build the
formalism for representing general
curves and general surfaces in
three-dimensional space its natural to
start with lines as the simplest curves
and planes as the simplest surfaces so
let's start with lines and let's talk
about ways of representing lines in
3-dimensional space
and here the idea that will be very
useful is the idea which we learned when
we studied parametric curves on the
plane the idea we learned back then is
that to understand the general curve it
is a good is a good way to understand
the general curve is to parameterize it
by an exaggerated parameter so here you
have a line and by this I mean a general
line not necessarily and with blackboard
that could be on one of those tilted
blackboards
so you have somewhere in the background
the three-dimensional coordinate system
which we are going which you are going
to use to represent this neckline so we
have to decide how to how best to
parameterize it so the first point is
that what information do we need to
underline and here is one convenient way
to describe it to determine a line I
have to tell you a particular point on
that line and I have to tell you a
direction of this line right and
directions we have now learned to
describe in terms of vectors so what I'm
saying is that in order to describe a
line it is sufficient to pick a point
let's call it L pick a point of L and
second pick direction vector we are
going to call this vector V and let's
call this point P now neither of these
objects is unique I could have chosen
this point at this point at this point
anything from the instantly many points
which belong to this line likewise the
direction vector is not unique either I
could take any multiple of this vector I
could take this vector this vector or
going in the opposite direction like a
vector for example this one would work
also so this is not unique but I have to
make some choices once I make this
choices once I make this choice that we
will have determined completely what the
line is so all we need to do now is to
give a description a parametrization of
other points on this line we already
have one of them so we need to find
other points and doing this is actually
very simple because we can now take
advantage of the notion of additional
vectors so here let me explain this let
me draw the position vector of this
point I recall that the position vector
of a point is the vector which has the
origin the letter all as to the initial
point and our point P as the final point
so that is the position vector of this
point
so now I would like to come to find
other points on the slide and finding
other points is the same as finding
position vectors of those other points
so for example I know another point on
this line which is this point at the end
point of this vector so question how do
I find the position how do I find the
position vector of this point well for
this we can use addition of vectors and
I recall that if you have two vectors
you can use the triangle rule to find
the sum between them here they are
perfectly arranged for that I first move
from the origin to this point and then I
move from this point to this point
so what's then what's the net result the
net result is I move from the origin to
this point so let's call this position
vector by r0 and let's call this one
this vector r1 then what I what I'm
saying is that r1 is equal to r0 plus V
so now by using addition of vectors I
have been able to find a different point
on the same line what about the rest of
the line well to get to other points I
can argue follows if I take any other
point say this one the vector which
connects the my initial point P to this
one let's call it P Prime
[Applause]
can be expressed as a multiple of the
vector V right because parallel vectors
are all proportional to each other
certainly the vector P prime V P Prime
it's proportional to V so there is some
number t0 t1 say for which we'll have
this formula for some number actually
this simply means product of V and the
scale the scalar T we can write it like
this so we can write it in the reverse
order t1 times three doesn't matter for
some number T 1 right but if so then I
can find the point the vector P prime Oh
P prime as R 0 plus V times 2 1
to show it to keep on the diagram simply
take this vector you find the position
vector for this point by taking the sum
of the initial one and this one which is
V times T right but in fact this is true
for any point P Prime so for each point
T prime there will be particular number
t1 or maybe it's better to just call it
t so that we don't worry about the
indices right and so we see that this
way we can actually parameterize I can
actually parameterize all points on this
line so in other words we can we can
write the position vector say R for a
general for a general point on this line
as r0 plus C and that's going to be the
crucial formula so you see it's we have
exploited the notion of additional
vectors this is this is why it was
important to talk about vectors and
about addition of its vectors because
otherwise it wouldn't be so clear how to
see how to get to those other points
which belong to the same line now let's
write this formula in components
let's write it in components so we'll
say our is XYZ and our 0 is X 0 y 0 V 0
and V is ABC this has 3 vectors so now
we just we just use it we just write
this formula out in in components so we
get the following for the first one we
get X is equal to X 0 plus 80 for the
second one we get this for the third one
we get this and now we look at this and
we recognize that it looks very similar
to parametric representation of course
on the plane which we have talked about
for two weeks or we can have and for
very good reason because in fact this is
a parametric representation of the line
L right because I have now to
parameterize general points of this line
in terms of some auxiliary coordinate T
so it certainly is very reminiscent of
the general formula for a parametric
curve on the plane the difference is
that when we talk about curves on the
plane we only have two coordinates to
describe x and y that's why they're only
two lines instead of three lines here
now we work in the three-dimensional
space so we have to specify the
dependents of each of the three
coordinate
but otherwise it looks very similar
because this is some function you can
call it f of t if you want it is another
function called G of T and this is a
third function score which we can call H
of T are there any questions about this
so I explained to you how to derive it
by cheating by using vectors but once
you have the end result you recognize
that this is simply a parametric
representation of the line so in
practice in practice on homework and on
Sayana there is test you're going to be
asked to to find parametric
representation for a line like this and
this is really easy because all you need
to know is the particular point on this
line and a particular vector on this
line or particular vector which goes
along this line like with selector V on
this picture that's all you need to know
and you can use the data which you are
given in a given in a given problem to
find a point and Allah and and and the
vector and then you just combine this
information in formula like this so here
is an example oh it's a very typical
question find the line
through which passes through the points
3 1 negative 1 & 3 to negative 6 so
that's another way to describe a line
because the line is also determined if
you said if you specify two points on it
right there is a unique line which
passes Hood through two different points
the points should be different
otherwise it points two points coincide
there are many lines which pass through
one point but if a points are different
then it's going to there's going to be
unique line which passes through so but
we would like to convert this
information into the information that we
need for the parametric representation
and so we need to know a point and and
the direction vector so the point
Wilkins will represent by this position
vector R 0 and the direction vector will
be our V in this case we actually have
two points so you can choose either one
it's your choice
so pick one let's say the first one 3 1
negative 1 so your R 0 is
so you see I mean I'm being really
really rigorous and pedantic here
I am distinguishing between the point
and the position vector of its point by
using different angle different brackets
the round brackets for points the angle
brackets for vectors it's very important
as I already explained so this is your
x0 y0 and z0 and now to find V we can
simply take the difference between the
position vectors of this two points
right you have two points on the line
you can surely find you can surely find
this vector by dating the difference
between this vector understand so this
is V you can write V as o P Prime - okay
so I simply take the difference from C
to negative 6 when I subtract 3 1 what's
the result result is 0 1 and negative 5
so now I have found what I needed which
is I have found the point on this curve
on this line and I have found the
direction vector and now I just put all
this data into this formula
right so the end result is X is equal to
this among this mi X 0 y 0 Z 0 so X is 3
plus this is V plus 0 times P which I
can just arrange inside like this y is
equal to 1 plus 1 times P Z is equal to
negative 1 minus 5 so that's the answer
when I say it's not the answer it's one
possible answer because someone else
could instead choose as a reference
point not the first one by the second
one or take the vector V the difference
not from this to this but for this to
this or even multiple of that so in
other words you have to realize that
there is not a unique parametric
representation for for a line there are
many different ways so if you get a
different answer from your friend it
doesn't mean that one of you made a
mistake it could be the both of you have
the right answer any questions about
this now there is another way to to
write the equation of a line in general
we are going to have this formula right
so let's focus on this formula
suppose that a B and C of our all
nonzero then we can express tea from
each of these formulas by dividing by a
B and C so we can find T is equal to X
minus x0 over a C is y minus y0 over B
and T is also z minus z0
over c but it's all the same T so we
could write the following formulas X
minus x0 divided by a is equal to Y
minus y0 divided by B equals Z minus Z 0
divided by Z so that's another way to
represent a line it's the first way and
this is a second way I would like to
explain what happens if one of these
numbers ABC's is actually equal to 0
which is the case where we have in this
particular problem so if a is equal to 0
then we have the equation x equals x 0
instead of x equals x 0 plus a key right
so in this case we cannot express key
from the first equation because T is not
in this equation but we can express key
skills from the second and third
equations provided B and C are nonzero
so if a is 0 by B and C are nonzero we
can write x equals x0 and y minus y0
over B equals e minus v-0 over C
so we get two equations like this it's
not surprising that we get two equations
in fact here it looks like one equation
but that's because of a sort of a nice
way in which I wrote it it's not really
one equations are to equality signs this
line actually represents two equations
this is equal to this and also this is
equal to this are two separate equations
and someone can say wait a minute it's
actually three different equations
because it says this is equal to this
this is equal to this and also this is
equal to zero but the third equation
follows from the first two because if
this is equal to this and this is equal
to this then the first and the third are
equal that's the usual kind of logical
usual logical implication that we have
for the quality so this really Kristin's
two two equations two equations and we
can see it more clearly indicates one
energy is equal to zero there are indeed
two equations in this case so in both
cases in the general case when a B and C
are all nonzero or in the special case
when a is equal to zero but B and C are
nonzero we have two equations describing
a line the results the special case when
both a and B are equal to 0 but seasons
is not equal to 0 I'm not going to tell
you what the answer is you you'll have
to figure it out on their own but you
will see that it's also two equations
and a and B and C cannot all be equal to
because that would mean that this vector
V is equal to 0 but I insisted that this
is a non zero vector take a direction
vector I have to make
for otherwise we wouldn't be able to do
this to do this to argue in this way
what's your question are you explaining
oh great
but sorry if a is equal to zero B is
equal to zero and C equals equal to 0
then V is not fine what V is defined but
we cannot be used in this case we has to
be a non zero vector now so you see what
happened is that we found actually two
different ways to represent the line
that's the first way and an important
feature of this first way is that we
have one auxiliary parameter which we
use to parameterize it one parameter or
we can write it in this way which really
means that we write two equations for
this line and now I want to remind you
that when we talked about curves on the
plane I explained that there are two
different ways to represent a curve
this is the first way when we have one
parameter but then the results the
second way in which you have one
equation like y equals f of X for f
custom to not missing which is that or
the favorite equation or favorite
equation for the circle x squared plus y
squared equals one so remember there was
exactly the same picture in the case of
course on the plane we had we learned
two different ways to represent such a
curve one is a pragmatic way where we
use one parameter and another one is by
by means of an equation and then we have
one equation so what I want to emphasize
emphasized now is the dimension count
here we talk about curves which means
dimension one curve in the plane the
dimension of a curve dimension of the
curve of the curve is one and the
dimension of the ambient space is too
risky because we talk about curves this
is about curves on the plane I'm not
going to write it down and put if I did
curve on the plane so the object itself
a dimension one and it's ambient it's
immersed its put in the ambient space
which has dimension 2 so when you
parameterize it the number of parameters
is going to be equal to the dimension of
your object of your object in this case
it mention is 1 so there is one
parameter
but the dimension of your object
dimension of the object as I explained
earlier is equal also to the dimension
of the ambient space ambient space minus
the number of equations in this case we
have dimension 1 which is equal to 2
which is number of variables x and y the
dimension of the ambient space the plane
so we have to subtract 1 to get from
down from 2 to 1 that means that number
of equations for curve on the plane has
to be 1 that's why a circle is given by
1 equation x squared plus y squared
equals 1
that's why graph of a curve is given by
one equation y equals f of X what
happens now is that instead of working
on the plane we work in space and in
space the dimension of is 3 and not 2 so
dimension of the ambient space now
becomes 3 but we are still talking about
curves well more specifically we're
talking we are talking about lines but
lines the special examples of course so
our object is a curve but now so the
dimension of the curve is the one by the
dimension of the ambient space is 3 if
you want to parameterize it you have to
still use one parameter
just like the curves on the coupon plane
that's why it's not surprising that we
end up with the parametric
representation with one parameter but if
you want to describe your line by
equations you have to use two equations
now because you have to be able to come
down from three to one you have to draw
a dimension from three to one so you
have to impose two independent equations
so 1 is equal to 3 minus 2 that's the
number of equations that's why it's not
surprising that we really have two
equations describing this line well in
this case I arrange them neatly in sort
of one equation but as I just explained
to you it's not one equation but it's
two equations or that in that case also
clearly two equations so the same
principle that I was talking about
earlier of dimension count dimension of
an object being the dimension of the
ambient space - number equations he
works here and it will be interesting to
see now how it works for planes before I
get to planes I just want to mention one
thing which is that you can be asked
where it's questions about lines once
you learn how to represent them you can
ask about you can be asked about
relative positions of lines and what can
happen with lines is that lines can
intersect or not that's one possible
that's one possible question do these
two lines intersect or not
another question is are they parallel or
not and so in fact there are there are
different relative positions that can
happen first of all first of all the two
lines can just intersect that's a
possibility
and and you can easily find you can
easily find out whether it is the case
you simply write the equation for the
first line we're using parameter T and
then you write the equation for the
second line using a different parameter
s because these are two different lines
that the origin talked to each other so
they have two different parameters so
what we need to know is whether for a
special value let's say this one is
parametrized by parameter T but this one
is parameters by parameter X so you want
to know whether for some key equals
equals some special value T 0 there
exist some special value s which is
equal to s 0 so that the resulting point
is the same and if you write this down
you will get a system of equations which
may or may not have solutions and that's
how you know whether the intersect or
not the second issue which arises here
is whether these two lines are parallel
to each other or not and that's real
easy because part of a permutation of
the of the line is a choice of a
direction vector two lines are parallel
if and only if the direction vectors are
proportional how do you know if they are
proportional well you just see if one of
them can be obtained by multiplying the
other one by a scalar that scalar will
be immediately determined by the first
coordinate and then you check whether it
works for the second and third quarters
that's how you see if they are parallel
or not so the questions like this but
once you have the traumatization
you can handle them finally that it's
possible that the lines do not intersect
and are not parallel to each other it's
also possible and here is an example so
let me keep this one
clicks line so let's suppose I have this
line if I have also this line so I mean
first of all this line can intersect
this one easily even if it's not in this
plane it could be something another
plane it could be a more general line
right it can also be parallel right but
these are not the only two choices
because it can be so it can be parallel
to this plane but not parallel to the
lines it can be like this so if you kind
of look like in this way you see the
kind of intersect but actually in at
least in this phase we don't intersect
because there's some distance between
this line and explain so in this case
they are called skew and again it's very
easy to find out whether they're skew or
not by using formalization okay so in
the remaining minutes I would like to
talk about plane so I talked extensively
about lines but now I won't talk about
planes which means that now
these are these are objects of a
different kind right because now these
are objects which are two-dimensional in
the case of curves we have analogous
objects on the plane because the plane
was two-dimensional so the plane fits
one dimensional of this curves in a nice
way but the plane cannot fit any
two-dimensional objects except itself
right or maybe some you can cut some
piece of a plane so so two-dimensional
because it is already two-dimensional
itself but in this space we can now have
all kinds of surfaces and again the
simple surfaces which we study add other
kind of linear surfaces the plane the
question is what is the best way to
represent the plane in a two-dimensional
space so we look again at this two
options one is to parameterize the other
one is to write equations if we were to
parameterize a plane we would need two
parameters two parameters not just one
because it's two-dimensional but if we
were to write down equations we only
need one equation right because for a
plane the dimension of plane is two
which is three minus one so that's
number of equations so we need to find a
nice way to write an equation clearly it
is more economical to represent a plane
by an equation than to try to represent
it in a parametric form because in
primary form we need two parameters
foremost would be rather complicated but
it won't need one equation so let's just
find out let's find a good way to write
down equations for this plane and the
point is that
but it's very nice it is a very nice way
to forget to this equation because a
plane can also be determined by a vector
and end up at the point so remember we
discussed that a curve a curve can be
sorry a line can be determined by a
point on this line and the direction
vector in the case of a plane there is
no direction vector if the war it would
be a curve it would be one-dimensional
so instead of talking about the
direction vector of a plane it is much
wiser to talk about perpendicular vector
to play so a plane unlike a curve is
determined by a point on the plane and a
vector which is perpendicular to it so
instead of vector V which is sort of
like a direction vector in the case of
lines we are going to have a
perpendicular vector torment my and I
will just draw it as a picture by a
point P and the vector n point vector n
perpendicular to the plane
so now how do we write down an equation
here we use the cross-product so that's
where the cross-product really comes
into play because if you have a
different point P Prime and you connect
this two points this vector n is going
to be perpendicular to this vector you
can easily see from that using that
board just say so this is your vector
from P to P Prime this is your plane
this vector is perpendicular to any
vector that you can have inside this
plane but repeat the condition of being
perpendicular can be expressed by using
the dot product I'm sorry I said cause
for the commenter's I meant the dot
product so just write down this equation
so the equation is that and dot t prime
sorry dot C T prime is equal to zero
this is a dot product because remember
we decided we discussed and we agreed
that two vectors are perpendicular if
and only if the dot product between them
is zero that's what I'm writing now if I
write N and K BT and I write PP prime as
before is X minus x0 y minus y0 and Z
minus v-0 and use the rule of the
product I will find for an equation so
here you have one equation in which ad p
x0 y0 and z0 are given XYZ as a pre
variable alright and and all XYZ which
satisfy this equation correspond to the
tality of all points on this plane
so as problem is a plane is given by one
equation and here's a way to derive this
equation ok so once you have this
equation there are all kinds of
questions it can be asked for example of
two planes at a parallel to each other
or not doing what is the angle between
these planes but all of this can be
immediately learned from this equation
by looking at it and interpreting the
coefficients ABC and x0 y0 and z0
as this data okay so I stop here and I
want to say one thing which is that I
have posted the solutions for the
homework for the first homework set on
the B space and I will be posting them
regularly every Tuesday
Tuesday night when the last of the
sections just when the last of the
sections is over okay so I'll see you
next Tuesday